README.md, before:

> ⚗️ **Research Repository**
>
> This is an experimental/research repository. Code here is exploratory and not production-ready.
> For production systems, see [BlackRoad-OS](https://github.com/BlackRoad-OS).

---

# Universal Computer

This repository contains an implementation of a **universal Turing machine** in Python.  A universal Turing machine is a theoretical device capable of simulating any other Turing machine.  In other words, it can compute anything that is computable.  The implementation here is simple and educational; it demonstrates the principles of universality and emulation in a compact form.

## Overview

The core of the project is a Turing machine simulator that reads a description of another machine and an input tape, then executes that machine's transition function step by step.  The simulator supports tapes of unbounded length in both directions and maintains a set of states, including a halting state.  The universal machine itself accepts programs encoded as tables of transitions.

### Features

- **Tape representation:** The tape is implemented as a Python dictionary mapping integer positions to symbols.  Positions not present in the dictionary are assumed to hold a blank symbol (`'_'`).
- **Transition function:** Each transition is a mapping from `(current_state, current_symbol)` to `(next_state, write_symbol, move_direction)`, where `move_direction` is `'L'`, `'R'`, or `'S'` (stay).
- **Machine description format:** Machine descriptions are loaded from JSON files.  A description includes the set of states, the input alphabet, the blank symbol, the transition function, the start state, and the halting state.
- **Simulation:** The simulator runs the machine until it reaches the halting state or exceeds a configurable step limit.  It yields the final tape contents and the number of steps executed.

### Running the simulator

To use the universal Turing machine, first prepare a JSON file describing the machine you want to simulate (see `machines/` for examples), then run:

```
python3 utm.py machines/your_machine.json --tape "your input tape here"
```

For example, to run a binary incrementer:

```
python3 utm.py machines/incrementer.json --tape "1101"
```

This will increment the binary number `1101` (13) to `1110` (14).

## Directory structure

- `utm.py` – the universal Turing machine simulator.
- `machines/` – sample machine descriptions in JSON format.
- `README.md` – this file.

## Sample machines

The repository includes a few sample machine descriptions:

- `incrementer.json` – a machine that increments a binary number.
- `even_odd.json` – a machine that decides whether a unary number has an even or odd number of symbols.

Feel free to add more machines to the `machines/` directory to explore the power of Turing machines!

## License

This project is released under the MIT License.  See `LICENSE` for details.

Commit message:

Add execution trace option to UTM

README.md, after:

> ⚗️ **Research Repository**
>
> This is an experimental/research repository. Code here is exploratory and not production-ready.
> For production systems, see [BlackRoad-OS](https://github.com/BlackRoad-OS).

---

# Universal Computer

This repository contains an implementation of a **universal Turing machine** in Python.  A universal Turing machine is a theoretical device capable of simulating any other Turing machine.  In other words, it can compute anything that is computable.  The implementation here is simple and educational; it demonstrates the principles of universality and emulation in a compact form.

## Overview

The core of the project is a Turing machine simulator that reads a description of another machine and an input tape, then executes that machine's transition function step by step.  The simulator supports tapes of unbounded length in both directions and maintains a set of states, including a halting state.  The universal machine itself accepts programs encoded as tables of transitions.

### Features

- **Tape representation:** The tape is implemented as a Python dictionary mapping integer positions to symbols.  Positions not present in the dictionary are assumed to hold a blank symbol (`'_'`).
- **Transition function:** Each transition is a mapping from `(current_state, current_symbol)` to `(next_state, write_symbol, move_direction)`, where `move_direction` is `'L'`, `'R'`, or `'S'` (stay).
- **Machine description format:** Machine descriptions are loaded from JSON files.  A description includes the set of states, the input alphabet, the blank symbol, the transition function, the start state, and the halting state.
- **Simulation:** The simulator runs the machine until it reaches the halting state or exceeds a configurable step limit.  It yields the final tape contents and the number of steps executed.

### Running the simulator

To use the universal Turing machine, first prepare a JSON file describing the machine you want to simulate (see `machines/` for examples), then run:

```
python3 utm.py machines/your_machine.json --tape "your input tape here"
```

For example, to run a binary incrementer:

```
python3 utm.py machines/incrementer.json --tape "1101"
```

This will increment the binary number `1101` (13) to `1110` (14).

To observe each step that the machine performs, pass `--trace`:

```
python3 utm.py machines/incrementer.json --tape "1101" --trace
```

## Directory structure

- `utm.py` – the universal Turing machine simulator.
- `machines/` – sample machine descriptions in JSON format.
- `README.md` – this file.

## Sample machines

The repository includes a few sample machine descriptions:

- `incrementer.json` – a machine that increments a binary number.
- `even_odd.json` – a machine that decides whether a unary number has an even or odd number of symbols.

Feel free to add more machines to the `machines/` directory to explore the power of Turing machines!

## License

This project is released under the MIT License.  See `LICENSE` for details.
